It's the 21st of June 2019 and I'm with Mrs. Elizabeth Lewis at her home in Rida.
I've had a previous chat but we'll just continue a little bit more.
Now Elizabeth, you grew up in Liverpool, Welsh parents, Welsh speaking, so how come you were
in Liverpool?
Why did you go there?
You know, why did your parents go to Liverpool?
Well, my father was brought up in Liverpool.
His parents came from Anglesey so they brought up their children in Liverpool because he
came there to work as a builder.
There was no work in Anglesey at the time so they'd be brought up in Liverpool but they
were all Welsh speaking.
And your mum also, she lived in Liverpool?
She went there to work really because there was no work around here.
Right, so Liverpool was a good meeting place as well as a good place to work then, yes.
And can you remember what part of Liverpool you actually grew up in?
Waver tree.
It was near Sefton Park really, it was between the two.
Right.
It's lovely that you were speaking Welsh and English in Liverpool, yes.
And then at a fairly early age you and your sister were evacuated to somewhere near Machynlleth.
Yes.
How did you feel about that?
Do you remember much about that?
I thought we were quite excited to begin with, like a holiday, wasn't it?
I see, well something comes out of everything.
We like being in the country.
I'm sure you did, yes.
It was very much a farming community there at Llylodglyn, is that what you called it?
Yes.
Llylodglyn.
Small holdings and there were a couple of big farms as well.
A very rural area I would imagine.
Was that Montgomeryshire then?
Yes.
Montgomeryshire, yes.
And was much Welsh spoken in that area?
Yes, it was all Welsh really.
All Welsh.
You fitted in very nicely there, no language problems.
And now it's all English.
Things have changed haven't they, yes.
So what sort of things did you do, you and your sister, when you were at the Llylodglyn
farm?
Were you involved with any household chores?
We were out more than we were in really.
We'd milk and feed the cows and clean out the pig and the hedges and things.
Always getting sticks for the fire because there was no other way of heating anything.
There was a wood near, we used to go up there and bring these branches down.
We always had to be sawing sticks every evening or something.
We weren't allowed to be sit idle.
We had to be doing something.
It certainly sounds as though you weren't.
What about chores in the home, bread making etc.?
Yes, it was mostly my mother's made the bread and tarts and that.
And did you and your sister help with the bread making?
Yes, we used to help.
And then of course the other two sisters were three years younger.
They were there as well.
It was a lot of work really.
I'm sure, so you must have used one of these old ovens.
Yes, we had a big bread oven.
Did you help with the kneading of it?
Well, we did sometimes, not always, but we knew how to do it.
That's great.
Did you make anything else?
Jam, cheese, butter, anything like that?
Butter, yes.
No, we didn't make cheese, we made butter.
Is butter quite easy to make?
Yes, it is really.
How long a process was that?
We were in a journey, it might take about 20 minutes or so.
And then we got it into shape after.
Right, so you must have had a very happy time there really.
Yes, we did really.
Although it was wartime.
We like being on the farm, we were quite excited about that.
You certainly make a change from Liverpool's.
In fact they must have been really pleased in a way that you were there to be so useful.
Around the place.
It could be.
When you came to live in Kevin Kaido, when you married Alan, what type of farm was Kevin Kaido?
A mixed farm really.
Cattle and sheep.
Did you have many people helping you on the farm?
There were always a couple of men on them, working there as well.
Of course everything was so slow then, not like today, you pull a tractor and it whizzes around.
Things do take a bit longer then I'm sure.
What sort of building was it?
I've heard Kevin Kaido described it as a hall.
Was it a very big, spacious place?
It wasn't really that big I don't think.
The walls were so thick, deep, it looked bigger from the outside than when you went inside.
Have you been there?
I have, yes.
I do remember visiting you.
A long time ago.
Yes.
Did you have many outhouses at all?
Yes, there were quite a few there.
Not as many as now of course.
How did your life on the farm change?
You said you probably didn't have very much in the way of mod cons to begin with.
No, we didn't have electricity or anything like that.
I remember as soon as we had electricity, about a year after I was married,
I had this whole world, I thought it was marvellous.
Everything was so much easier then it had been before.
I'm sure, yes.
I suppose shearing would have been a very busy time for you every year,
something to look forward to.
How many people were involved with that sort of thing?
Between 20 and 30 I would think, roughly.
I did the hand shearing, it took quite a bit of time.
It's wonderful to watch people shearing by hand, isn't it?
Of course you'd have to provide a meal for them, wouldn't you?
Yes, that's right.
And cider.
Cider, that sounds okay.
Did you have your own press there?
We had a bottle of cider there.
Did you make the cider?
No.
Cider would be lovely, very thirst quenching, I'm sure.
Right.
Can you think of anything else that really was significant
in the way things changed in farming matters?
In the household?
Yeah, well, both really.
In the household, electricity was the biggest thing,
wasn't washing the clothes and that.
It was so much easier to have electricity.
Before it was, I think, it was carbon gas and things like that,
but it was pretty hopeless, really.
You had to manage somehow.
But everybody was the same.
It's hard to imagine, really, isn't it?
Living without these things that we take.
It would be quite cold in the winter without central heating.
No central heating or anything.
I'm sure, I'm sure.
So now your son farms, of course, Kevin Kaido.
How quickly does he get things like the shearing done?
All in a day now.
All in a day, with much help?
Not a lot.
It was just the two boys, Barry and my grandsons,
and Arlene, and one other boy.
That's all.
Things have certainly changed, yes.
And so your grandchildren now,
they've become Welsh speakers, I would imagine.
A lot of them have.
There are two of them teaching Welsh,
teaching in Breda, through the medium of Welsh.
And yet they hadn't been brought up Welsh.
And the other one, she's in Carmarthen now, she's married,
she was teaching through the medium of Welsh.
So it's surprising how they'd learn to just go to school.
They didn't have it at home.
Yes, things have certainly changed.
It looks as though we've almost come full circle now with Welsh.
But there's more Welsh rap now than ever, I think,
than we had before.
I think so, everything has changed.
Because a lot of it's all the speak Welsh now,
and it's only from going to school.
They don't have it at home.
So you're surprised at how much.
They were singing in Welsh on Wednesday.
Nursery children were in the...
What's the name?
The Maithrin, is it?
Some nursery, they were between one and four.
They came to the drop-in,
which we have after the Lutsen Club.
And they were all these little tuts,
and they were singing in Welsh.
That is lovely, isn't it?
Yes, they were all full of beans.
They were all very young, and that's when you learn it.
All right, well, thank you very much for your time,
Elizabeth, and I'm sure we'll meet again for another chat.
Thank you.